Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
1
Report and Recommendations In Brief
The UK Covid-19 Inquiry is an independent public inquiry examining the response 
to, and impact of, the Covid-19 pandemic, to learn lessons for the future. It is bound 
by its terms of reference set by the then Prime Minister Boris Johnson.
The scale of the pandemic was unprecedented; the Inquiry has a huge range of 
issues to cover.
The Chair of the Inquiry, The Rt Hon the Baroness Hallett DBE, decided to address 
this challenge by dividing its work into separate investigations known as modules. 
Each module is focused on a different topic with its own public hearings where the 
Chair hears evidence.
Following hearings, recommendations for changes are developed and put into a 
Module Report. These reports contain findings from the evidence collected across 
each module and the Chair’s recommendations for the future. The report for Module 
1 (Resilience and Preparedness) has already been published.
 
UKInquiry

Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
2
The second set of modules, Module 2 (UK), Module 2A (Scotland), Module 2B (Wales) 
and Module 2C (Northern Ireland), focuses on the core political and administrative 
decision-making across the UK in response to the Covid-19 pandemic.
This has provided the Inquiry with the opportunity to compare and contrast the 
different choices made by the four governments in responding to the same 
emergency and to identify the most important lessons for responding to future 
UK-wide emergencies.
Future reports will focus on specific areas, including:
• Healthcare systems
• Vaccines and therapeutics
• Procurement and distribution of key equipment and supplies
• The care sector
• Test, trace and isolate programmes
• Children and young people
• The economic response to the pandemic
• The impact on society
UKInquiry

Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
3
Key findings
The emergence of Covid-19
1. The initial response to the pandemic was marked by a lack of information and a 
lack of urgency. 
2. Despite clear signs that the virus was spreading globally, all four nations failed to 
take sufficiently timely and effective action. 
3. Limited testing capacity and a lack of adequate surveillance mechanisms meant 
that decision makers did not appreciate the extent to which the virus was 
spreading undetected in the UK and they failed to recognise the level of threat 
posed. This was compounded by misleading assurances from the Department of 
Health and Social Care and the widely held view that the UK was well prepared 
for a pandemic. 
4. The devolved administrations were too reliant on the UK government to lead the 
response. 
The first UK-wide lockdown
5. The UK government’s initial approach was to slow the spread of the virus. By 13 
March 2020 it was clear the true number of cases was several times higher than 
previously estimated and that this approach would risk healthcare systems 
being overwhelmed. 
6. The UK government introduced advisory restrictions on 16 March 2020, 
including self-isolation, household quarantine and social distancing. Had 
restrictions been introduced sooner - when the number of cases was lower - the 
mandatory lockdown from 23 March might have been shorter or not necessary 
at all.
Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political governance
The UK Covid-19 Inquiry has found that the response of the four governments was 
a repeated case of ‘too little, too late’. 
Lockdowns in 2020 and 2021 undoubtedly saved lives, but only became inevitable 
because of the acts and omissions of the four governments.
UKInquiry

Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
4
7. This lack of urgency and the huge rise in infections made a mandatory lockdown 
inevitable. It should have been introduced one week earlier. Modelling shows 
that in England alone there would have been approximately 23,000 fewer 
deaths in the first wave up until 1 July 2020.  
8. The Inquiry rejects the criticism that the four governments were wrong to impose 
a mandatory lockdown on 23 March 2020. All four governments received clear 
and compelling advice to do so. Without it, the growth in transmission would 
have led to an unacceptable loss of life. However, their failure to act promptly 
and effectively had put them in this position. 
Exiting the first lockdown
9. When entering the first lockdown, none of the four governments had a strategy 
for when or how they would exit the lockdown.  
10. On 4 July 2020 the majority of restrictions in England were eased, despite 
advice to the UK government that this was high-risk and infections could spread 
more quickly. 
11. Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland governments eased restrictions more 
gradually over summer 2020, increasing the chance that further lockdowns may 
not be necessary or as restrictive. 
12. But, none of the four governments gave enough attention to the possibility of a 
second wave, meaning there was very little contingency planning in place.
 
The second wave
13. The UK government, Welsh Government and Northern Ireland Executive 
introduced restrictions too late when faced with rising case rates in autumn 
2020 and they were not in place for long enough, or were too weak to control 
the spread of the virus. 
14. In England, despite warnings, the UK government imposed weak restrictions, 
allowing the virus to continue to spread rapidly. If a ‘circuit breaker’ lockdown 
had been introduced in late September or early October 2020, the second 
national lockdown in England on 5 November could have been shorter or 
possibly avoided entirely.
UKInquiry

Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
5
15. Despite being advised on 5 October 2020 that further restrictions were needed, 
the Welsh Government did not implement a two-week ‘firebreak’ until 23 
October. 
16. In Northern Ireland, politically divided Executive Committee meetings led to 
chaotic decision-making. A four-week circuit breaker was introduced on 16 
October 2020, despite advice that a six-week intervention was needed.  
17. In Scotland, the quick introduction of stringent, locally targeted measures in the 
autumn meant cases grew more gradually, avoiding a nationwide lockdown.  
18. In late 2020, the more transmissible Alpha variant rapidly increased cases. 
Whilst entirely foreseeable, all four governments failed to recognise this threat 
and did not take action until infection levels were critical. This created a situation 
in which a return to lockdown restrictions seemed to them to be unavoidable.
The vaccination rollout and Delta and Omicron variants
19. In December 2020, the UK was the first country in the world to approve a 
vaccine and commence a vaccination programme. 
20. When the Delta variant emerged in March 2021, all four governments had 
learned from the experience of earlier lockdowns. They delayed planned 
relaxations to allow time for the vaccine rollout to progress. They exited 
lockdown by balancing the scale of infection against the additional protection 
the vaccine offered.
21. The Omicron variant - less severe but much more transmissible - emerged in the 
winter of 2021. Despite the protection of the vaccine, the sheer number of cases 
meant more than 30,000 people died with Covid-19 in the UK between 
November 2021 and June 2022.
22. The approach of all four governments in the second half of 2021 had an element 
of risk. If the vaccines had been less effective or if Omicron was as severe as 
previous variants, the consequences would have been disastrous.
UKInquiry

Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
6
Key themes have emerged.
The need for proper planning and preparedness 
This is a constant theme throughout the Inquiry. Had the UK been better prepared, 
lives would have been saved, suffering reduced and the economic cost of the 
pandemic far lower. The choices before decision makers would have been very 
different. 
The need for prompt and effective action to combat a virus
Governments must act swiftly and decisively to stand any chance of stopping the 
spread of a virus. 
Scientific and technical advice 
SAGE (the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies) provided high-quality 
scientific advice at extreme pace, but the effectiveness of SAGE’s advice was 
constrained by various factors including a lack of clearly stated objectives by the 
UK government. 
Vulnerabilities and inequalities 
The pandemic affected everyone but the impact was not equal. Older people, 
disabled people and some ethnic minority groups faced a higher risk of dying from 
Covid-19. The increased risk of harm was also strongly influenced by socio-
economic factors.
Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups were also affected by the restrictions 
introduced to control the virus. Despite harm being foreseeable, the impact on 
them was not adequately considered in pandemic planning or when decisions were 
taken to respond to the virus.
Government decision-making 
The UK Cabinet was often sidelined in decision-making. Similarly, in the Scottish 
Government, authority rested with a small group of ministers. But, the Welsh 
Cabinet was fully engaged, with decisions mostly by consensus. 
UKInquiry

Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
7
Coordination of the Northern Ireland Executive’s response was weakened by the 
operational independence of departments and decision-making was marred by 
political disputes. 
At the centre of the UK government there was a toxic and chaotic culture.
Public health communications
Controlling the virus was dependent on the public understanding the risk they 
faced and acting accordingly. The ‘Stay At Home’ campaign was effective at 
maximising compliance in the first lockdown, but its simplicity had risks, such as 
discouraging those needing to seek help or medical treatment from leaving home. 
The complexity of regulations, localised restrictions and variations in rules across 
the four nations made it difficult for the public to understand what rules applied. 
Allegations of rule breaking by ministers and advisers caused huge distress and 
undermined public confidence in their governments. 
Legislation and enforcement 
Confusion between advice and binding legal restrictions undermined trust and 
compliance and made enforcement by the police practically impossible or legally 
uncertain in some cases. This was particularly the case where legal rules diverged 
across the UK.
Intergovernmental working 
A lack of trust between the then Prime Minister and some of the leaders of the 
devolved nations affected the collaborative approach to decision-making. It is 
incumbent on politicians to work collectively in the public interest in any future 
emergency.
UKInquiry

Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C: Core decision-making and political 
governance 
8
Specific recommendations
In addition to identifying 10 lessons to inform the planning for and response to a 
pandemic, a comprehensive description of recommendations can be found in the full 
Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C Report. These are designed to work together with the 
recommendations from the Inquiry’s Module 1 Report, to better safeguard the UK in 
any future pandemic. 
The recommendations include:
Broadening participation in SAGE (the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies), 
through open recruitment of experts and representation of devolved administrations. 
Reforming and clarifying the structures for decision-making during emergencies within 
each nation.
Improving consideration of the impact that decisions might have on those most at risk 
in an emergency: changes should aim to identify any risks to vulnerable groups, in both 
the planning for and response to emergencies. 
Ensuring that decisions and their implications are clearly communicated to the public. 
Laws and guidance should be easily understood and available in accessible formats.
Enabling greater parliamentary scrutiny of the use of emergency powers through 
safeguards such as time limits and regular reporting on how powers have been used.
Establishing structures to improve the communication between the four nations during 
an emergency to ensure better alignment of policies where desirable and to provide a 
clear rationale for differences in approach where necessary.
The Chair expects that recommendations are acted upon and implemented within the 
time frames set out in the recommendations. The Inquiry will be monitoring the 
implementation of the recommendations during its lifetime.
To find out more or to download a copy of the full Module 2, 2A, 2B, 2C Report or 
other accessible formats, visit: https://covid19.public-inquiry.uk/reports
UKInquiry